Tony Blair committed to an invasion of Iraq almost eight months before receiving parliamentary and legal backing, and began military action before diplomatic alternatives were exhausted, a much-awaited inquiry into the conflict has concluded.
The report by Sir John Chilcot, a former civil servant, amounts to an excoriating verdict on Britain’s political, military and intelligence establishments, all of which are heavily implicated for misjudgments and occasionally ineptitude. It reserves particular criticism for Mr Blair, the former prime minister.
The report, published on Wednesday after a seven-year investigation, is the most detailed assessment by any government of the decision to go to war in Iraq and management of the subsequent occupation.
It also is likely to shape forever the legacy of a leader who was once one of Britain’s most popular postwar premiers, only to become a figure of intense divisiveness at home after committing himself as the closest wartime ally of US President George W Bush.
In a previously unpublished memo from July 2002, Mr Blair told Mr Bush: “I will be with you, whatever.” That commitment — given without consulting colleagues — made it “very difficult for the UK subsequently to withdraw its support” for the March 2003 invasion, the report found.
Mr Blair included the sentence against the advice of Jonathan Powell, his chief of staff, and Sir David Manning, his foreign policy adviser, who thought it was “too sweeping”.
Crucially, the report rejects Mr Blair’s arguments that diplomatic options for controlling Iraq’s weapons programmes — particularly via the UN — were not worth pursuing further by March 2003. “Military action at that time was not a last resort,” Sir John said.
The Chilcot report finds prewar intelligence was misrepresented, legal advice was not given satisfactorily, military strategies were impractical and planning for the occupation was “wholly inadequate”. The direct cost of the conflict to the UK was “at least £9.2bn”.
Mr Blair launched a vigorous defence of his actions shortly after the report was published. He insisted the toppling of Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein had been the correct decision and that the inquiry had uncovered no “bad faith, lies or deceit.”
“I express more sorrow, regret and apology than you may ever know or can believe,” Mr Blair said, adding there were “no lies, cabinet was not misled and there was no secret commitment to war.”
Mr Blair also challenged the report’s suggestion that the UK could have delayed military action to pursue diplomacy, saying that by March 2003 a US invasion was going to take place regardless.
The report finds that the use of force was undertaken at a time when Saddam posed “no imminent threat” and in a way that undermined the authority of the UN Security Council.
Mr Blair is found to have “overestimated his ability to influence US decisions on Iraq”. His account of postwar planning is also rejected. “Mr Blair told the inquiry that the difficulties encountered in Iraq could not have been known in advance. We do not agree that hindsight is required,” the report says.
Crucially, the report casts doubt on Mr Blair’s statement to Peter Goldsmith, the attorney-general, that Iraq had continued to breach its UN obligations shortly before war began.
The assurance contributed to Lord Goldsmith’s revised conclusion, made on the invasion’s eve, that the conflict was legal — but the report finds “the precise basis on which Mr Blair made that decision was not clear”.
However, the report will disappoint those hoping for a clear verdict that the former prime minister lied about intelligence, particularly that Saddam was producing chemical and biological weapons. No such armaments were ever found.
Instead, the report concludes that the Joint Intelligence Committee, then chaired by former MI6 chief Sir John Scarlett, “should have made . . . clear to Mr Blair” that sources had not established beyond doubt that Saddam had an active bio-weapons programme.
David Cameron, the current prime minister, told parliament that some of the report’s lessons had already been learned and that the UK should not shy away from standing with the US or from intervening abroad. “Britain has no greater friend in the world than America,” he said. “We should not conclude that intervention was always wrong.”
Families of Britons who died in the Iraq war said they were yet to decide whether to take legal action against Mr Blair and other architects of the invasion. “Legal actions are possible; the report is full,” a representative said.
Mr Cameron said there would be a two-day debate in the Commons on the Chilcot report.
Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, who opposed the war at the time, said the report showed the war was “an act of military aggression launched on a false pretext”. He later described it as a “catastrophe” and concluded: “I now apologise sincerely on behalf of my party for the decision to go to war in Iraq”.
Tim Farron, leader of the Liberal Democrats, the only major party to oppose the invasion, said Mr Blair and Mr Bush had “created a failed state which continues to be the source of extremism and instability across [the] Middle East”.
The findings will bring some comfort to those on both sides of the argument, writes Sebastian Payne
He said the former prime minister should acknowledge “his catastrophic mistake”, and that Tory politicians, including Theresa May, the leadership frontrunner, should be held responsible for their support for the war.
Military strategy comes in for heavy criticism in the report. From 2003 to 2009, “the UK’s most consistent strategic objective in relation to Iraq was to reduce the level of its deployed forces”, the report finds. In particular, generals wished to focus on Afghanistan where they saw a better chance of success.
“The UK spent time and energy on rewriting strategies, which tended to describe a desired end state without setting out how it would be reached,” the report says. Britain ended combat operations in 2009, leaving a “very long way from success”.
The report adds that by 2007, militia dominance in Basra, which UK military commanders were unable to challenge, led to the UK exchanging detainee releases for an end to the targeting of its forces. “It was humiliating that the UK reached a position in which an agreement with a militia group which had been actively targeting UK forces was considered the best option available.”
More than 200 British citizens — soldiers, aid workers and others — died as a result of the conflict in Iraq
The Chilcot report, published online, totals more than 6,000 pages comprising 2.6m words. It includes a 145-page executive summary and comes with about 1,500 previously unpublished government documents.
Among its lessons are that a “military timetable should not be allowed to dictate a diplomatic timetable” and that governments should “guard against overstating what military action might achieve and against any tendency to play down the risks”.
Particular attention is paid to how to avoid a repeat of the September 2002 dossier that overstated the certainty about Iraq’s weapons programmes and included a foreword from Mr Blair. Future documents should have a “clear separation of responsibility” between those assessing the intelligence and those making the argument for policy.